# BlackFridaySale
Introduction
The purpose of this study is to observe and analyze the consumer behaviors of the Black Friday customer. The day after Thanksgiving, Black Friday is a term used by the retail industry in the United States that signifies the Christmas holiday shopping season. (Swilley, 2013) Thanksgiving Day is on the last Thursday of November; therefore, the holiday shopping season runs from the Friday after Thanksgiving Day and continues until Christmas eve, the day before Christmas. Black Friday is not a national holiday. However, many employees have Thanksgiving Day holidays and the following day, increasing the number of potential shoppers on that Friday. Black Friday is famously known for long lines with customers waiting outdoors in cold weather waiting for the store to open, confusion, and customers' chaos. Once the retail doors open for business, the challenges faced are Heavily crowded stores, limited products available at a reduced price, long lines, and the lack of advertised sale products. 6 Black Friday was originated in Philadelphia around the year 1961. The police described it as the day where there would be heavy pedestrians and vehicular traffic after Thanksgiving Day. Since the 21st century, retailers have been attempts in the US to introduce Black Friday in other countries. Retailers outside the US have promoted black Friday sales to compete with the US retailers in online sales. Black Friday is considered to be the most significant sale that happens in the United States. Black Friday and Cyber Monday combined have a revolutionary history in the shopping industry. However, there have been many changes in the trends and the shoppers. There are many advancements and changes in shopping approaches, and there have also been many factors that influenced the traditional shopping methods. Since this is a digital era, there have been many online shopping activities compared to in-store shopping.
# Problem Statement
A Retail Company wants to understand the customer purchase behaviour specifically purchase amount against various products of different categories.
They have shared purchase summary of various customers for selected high-volume products from last month. The dataset also contains customer demographics (age, gender, marital status, city_type, stay_in_current_city), product details (product_id, product category) and total purchase amount from last month.
Now they want to analyse purchase amount of customer against various products which will help them create personalized offer for customers against different products.
# Dataset
Source: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/sdolezel/black-friday
Reason for choosing this industry and dataset
With the holiday season fast approaching, I found it intriguing to examine a dataset revolving around a hypothetical store and data of its shoppers. As described by the author, "The dataset is comprised of 550,000 observations
about Black Friday shoppers in a retail store, it contains different kinds of variables either numerical or categorical. It contains missing values."
Asking right questions is the key part of the analysis process. This will define what you are going to present to the audience.
Answers to the right questions will provide key inputs to the company or the audience to improve their business.
If we consider our Black Friday data set the appropriate questions and their results will lead to better functioning of the retail store on their sales.
1. Which age group of customers is more likely to purchase with more amount per person?
2. Which age group and gender have high visiting rate to the retail store?
3. Which occupation type have high purchase rate?
4. Who has high purchase rate newly settled or people staying from long time?
5. Based on marital status and gender who has high purchase rate?
6. Which product is popular for each age group? 7. What is the purchase percent for each age group and for gender Group in total purchase amount? 8. Which cities spend the most? 9. Which user spends the most in black Friday sales list top 20. 10. Which products are most popular during Black Friday, list the top 20
# Available data
This is the current data they have available:
Data made available “ABC Private Limited” A closer look at the features 1. User_ID: A distinct ID is given to the customers to identify them uniquely. 2. Product_ID: A distinct ID is given to products to identify them uniquely. 3. Gender: M or F can be used as a binary variable. 4. Age: Age is given in bins with 6 categories. 5. Occupation: The type of occupation a user does, it is already masked. 6. City_Category: The category of the city out of A, B, C. Should be used as Categorical Variable. 7. Stay_In_Current_City_Years: It has 5 values: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4+ and may be used as categorical variables. 8. Marital_Status: 0: Unmarried and 1: Married. It is expected that marital status does affect the Purchase value.
9. Product_Category_1: The primary category that a product belongs to. It can be a useful feature as some certain category of products are sold more often than others. 10. Product_Category_2: The Secondary category of a product. If there is no secondary category this will be Null. 11. Product_Category_3: The Tertiary Category of a product. This will be only occupied when Category 1 and 2 are occupied. Also, if a product does not have a tertiary category, it will be Null. 12. Purchase: This is the target variable.
If we analyse it individually, we see that we do not have any information regarding the stores. Moreover, there is some information related to the customer such as age group, sex, occupation and marital status. On the other hand, we have data
on the city’s size and how many years the customer has lived in it whereas on the product’s side there is only information regarding the categories and the amount spent. It is my belief that Gender , Age , City_Category , Product_Category_1 are the predictors that will influence more the amount spent by a customer on this day.
